# My Brain on Meditation

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*vqO5-QdEGPszsS6BogFUtw.jpeg)

#### New Beginnings

Recently I started experimenting with meditation. I decided to download
the Headspace app on my phone and take it for a test run for a few days.
It has been two week s now and I have subscribed to the app to unlock
the further lessons. I want to try convey my thoughts on the process of
meditation and the effects it has had on me.

Start with a soft focus, you might not be quite paying attention to this
article; I know I have done that before. Processing words but they're
going straight in the bin (*\> dev/null*, if you will excuse the
computer joke). But now take a moment, close your eyes (*after* the end
of these instructions), begin to take deep and regular breaths. Feel the
weight of your body where you are sitting. Now, count to 10 as you
breathe. Breathe in through your nose, that's 1. And out through your
mouth, that's 2. So on.

#### Foundations

This forms the foundation of the meditation practiced through Headspace.
Do you feel like you're able to concentrate on this article a bit better
now? Don't worry if not. It might not be enlightening or maybe you need
more time to practice this technique. For me, even after two weeks my
mind still wanders a lot. The point is not to scorn yourself though. It
is just to acknowledge that your mind has gone off track to something
else it would rather think about and now bring it right back to t he
topic or task you really wish to think about. The focus on your body
where you are seated, followed by the further focus on your breath
serves as the task that you are training with. You may notice that the
mind will wander off to another place and, once you've seen this, you
reel it back in. Focus.\
\
I really see this as an exercise of the brain. It's a routine where I'm
training and testing the brain in a different way than usual. I try to
keep a regular time that I do this exercise, around 8.30 a.m. when I get
out of the shower and have just dressed. I sit myself down into a chair
where I can have my back straight, feeling comfortable, and then I
begin. The voice from the app begins with a new analogy or task that
builds on top of the foundation. It could be strengthening the exercise
with some new way of thinking, adding more weight if you'd like. Or it
could be to start acknowledging why you chose to start meditation. Or
even how your meditation will affect others around you.

#### Be Mindful

Mindfulness is the word often used to describe this. To accept any
thoughts or emotions that are occurring right now but not paying too
much attention to them that t hey drag you away from the true task. This
part I understand but find it harder to follow through with out in the
wild. The storm in my mind can rage and I let it. I dwell on feelings.
Anxiety, forlorn, even joy. They overpower me to the point I cannot do
anything else other than think about them and what is causing them. Even
starting to notice this I feel will help in the long run though. If I
become more mindful of these moments and I can let them pass easier I
will be able to resume the things that I actually want to accomplish,
such as work, kickboxing, reading, or trying to write about stuff!

This seems like a loftier goal in the exercising, like adding 20kg to
your bench. But I did notice more immediate effects when first starting
out and up to now. During the meditation and at the closing moments of
it I felt more serene about how I felt in that moment. It wasn't
necessarily pure joy, but more a peace. At times I could feel a sadness
well up behind my eyes as a few tears would flow to my cheek. It was the
ability to acknowledge there was something hidden and being able to let
it out that made me feel anew. My body would feel light, as I stretched
and headed to the office for a new day with a smile on my face.

Thank you Joe for the proof readingÂ :)
