# Coffee, Curries, and Monads – My journey through Haskell

#### A Time to Reflect

I sat in a coffee shop reflecting on my journey in Haskell today. It was
spurred on by briefly seeing the whole "monads are pipes" thing and some
responses to it. I don't involve myself in these discussions generally,
and I'm not going to here. What I am going to do is tell you a little
about myself, my programming journey, and why I enjoy programming in
Haskell. Hopefully it will encourage you to try it out and witness your
own joy with the language.

#### First Encounters of the Haskell Kind

Sat upstairs in a lecture room in Trinity I heard the name Haskell for
the first time. "A pure functional and lazy language.", stated my
lecturer. "Sounds like my kind of language", I jested. My friend Ian
scorned me, saying that it meant lazy in the evaluation sense and not
what I was thinking. I made fun at the time, but little did I know that
it really would become "my kind of language."

There was an uphill struggle as I tried to grasp the new, wonderful and
strange features of the language. Immutability, pattern matching,
abstract data types, typeclasses and much more were very foreign to me.
Even the *dreaded* Monad was encountered and it did not sink in at the
time.

#### Cup full of Beans

The thing is, I had this exact experience twice before during my
computer science degree. The first occurred when I was first learning
programming through Java. I was immediately lost with loops,
if/then/else and objects. Our lecturer threw us in the deep and end and
many of us thrashed against the waters. Only thanks to the second
semester lecturer, Arthur Hughes, I was able to understand programming
better. There was an emphasis on breaking down problems into smaller
parts and building up the solution.

#### I cannot C what's happening

The second incident of programmatic drowning was encountering C for the
the first time. With some assembly under my belt I was familiar with
what was going on at the lower levels of programming. But when I had to
start thinking about pointers and memory in this language, I quickly
became lost. Segfaults became the bane of my life as I tried to trace
where the issue was occurring using the tried and tested technique of
`printf`. With enough practice I became
more and more comfortable with the concepts and I was eventually able to
program C at a competent level. Well, enough to obtain a good grade. I
would not program C professionally today --- not without a month or two
of studying the language again.

#### Practice makes Perfect

The running theme of these two incidents was that there was a struggle
in learning at the beginning. I persevered by practicing over and over,
ingraining the concepts into my head, and finally, understanding what
everything was all about. Learning does not come for free. The cost
comes in the form of your precious time as you work to achieve the
results you want or expect. Haskell was no different for me.

My story in Haskell continues when I took on the follow-up module of
functional programming the next year of college. We went through more
functional techniques and concepts: Generalised Abstract Data Types,
concurrency primitives and Monad Transformers. These concepts still felt
a bit out of grasp, but I knew there was something there. There was
something that kept pulling me back to Haskell. I finished the module
and Haskell became more of a reading hobby over the next couple of
years.

#### Master of None

My enlightenment came while I was procrastinating my Masters thesis. I
loathed the topic I chose so much that I reached for anything else that
I could do to take me away from it. Couple that with my tendency to
productively procrastinate, [Haskell Programming From First
Principles](http://haskellbook.com/),
by Chris Allen and Julie Moronuki, was the perfect escape. Starting from
the basic building blocks, I went through exercise by exercise; chapter
by chapter. As if picking a body part and exercising it over and over,
my Haskell muscles became stronger and quicker. Repetition ensured that
I had a reflexive memory of what I was learning. Everything finally
began to click into place and I began to understand what the hidden
feeling was. I understood why I liked Haskell so much.

I see Haskell as a language that works *with* me as much I work *with*
it. The structure of programs via expressions and immutability help me
think about what I'm trying to achieve with the program. In a way, I
always felt like I'm trying to trick programs into working for me when I
wrote Python. It's the opposite for Haskell, I'm just putting a bunch of
puzzle pieces together and nothing more needs to go in. I look at the
pieces and match them up; simple. If I change the pieces it's
immediately apparent how to change the rest, refactoring really is a
breeze. This is the first thing that comes to mind when I think about
writing Haskell, but there is so much more. I'm far from done learning
the great techniques and concepts in Haskell and functional programming
in general and I'm glad for it. To keep learning is a key philosophy of
mine.

#### Pay it Forward

I took my new found knowledge and began to look at writing Haskell more
seriously. I contributed to open source projects, with the helpful push
from Chris Allen, who I can now call a friend :). I grew so comfortable
with the language that I gained enough courage and applied to
[Formation](http://formation.ai/). I
was able to get the job and have been writing Haskell professionally for
more than half a year now. As well as this, one of my favourite things
to do in my free time these days is to help people learning Haskell by
answering questions on
[Slack](https://fpchat-invite.herokuapp.com/) and co-organising a [study group in
Dublin](https://www.meetup.com/haskell-dublin-meetup/).

I have been approached on multiple occasions by hopeful programmers
wishing to get a job writing Haskell. I generally give them a shorter
version of this story. This is why I'm writing this today, to encourage
those people and just about anyone who is willing to learn Haskell.
Encourage them to not be afraid or scoff at things that seem technical.
Encourage them to try a programming that will challenge them just like
they felt challenged with their first language. I found joy in
programming Haskell and I hope you can too!

Edit: I missed credit to Julie Moronuki who also authored Haskell
Programming From First Principles. Apologies Julie, and thank you Kris
Nuttycombe for pointing that out!
